**ADHIKARANA V**
<br><br>
Īkshatyadhikarana.
<br><br>
**Sutra 5.** Ī**kshaternāśabdam.**
<br><br>
Because the activity imported by the root īksh (to see i.e. to think) is predicated (in relation to what constitutes the cause of the world) that which is not revealed solely by the scripture, (viz. the pradhāna)<sup>341</sup> is not (the Sat or the Existence which is referred to in the scriptural passage relating to the cause of the world).
<br><br>
It has been already stated that that Brahman, who is taught in the scriptural passage which relates to the cause of the world and which begins with -"From whom all these (beings are born)"-\[Taitt. Up. III. I. I.\], (that Brahman\] who is omniscient, who is omnipotent, who is hostile to all that is evil and forms the only seat of all the auspicious qualities,- has to be enquired into. Now, by means of this aphorism-"Because the activity imported by the root īksh (to see i. e. to think), is predicated (in relation to what constitutes the cause of the world), that which is not revealed solely by the scripture (viz. the pradhāna) is not (the Sat or the Existence which is referred to in the scriptural passage relating to the cause of the world)", and by means of other aphorisms, it is declared that the scriptural passages<sup>342</sup> which mention the cause of the world do not possess the power of denoting the prādhana and other similar things which are capable of being established by the process of logical inference. This is what is revealed in the Chāndogya: ̶ " Existence alone, my dear child, this was in the beginning, one only, without a second…….. It thought-'May I become manifold and be born'. It created tejas, &c." \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 2. I, 2, et seq.\]. Here the doubt arises whether that, which is the cause of the world and is denoted by the word Existence (or Sat), is the pradhana which has been mentioned by others and is capable of being established by logical inference, or whether it is the Brahman who possesses the characteristics already stated? It is perhaps held<sup>343</sup> that it is the pradhāna. Why? The passage-"Existence alone, my dear child, this was in the beginning, one only, &c."-speaks of the causalcondition of that thing which is denoted by the word 'this', which constitutes the thing to be enjoyed (or endured) by intelligent beings (viz. the individual souls), and which is made up (of the qualities) of sattva (goodness), rajas (passion), and tamas (darkness), and which (again) exists in variously modified forms such as the ether, &c. Indeed, a thing which exists in the condition of a cause acquires the character of an effect merely by getting into another condition. Whatever thing and whatever (general) nature (thereof) exist in the condition of a cause, that same thing and that same nature (thereof) exist also in the condition of an effect. Moreover, a produced effect is made up (of the qualities) of sattva, &c. Therefore that pradhāna in which these qualities are held in a state of equilibrium<sup>344</sup> is alone the cause (of the universe). That same (pradhāna) is, in the passage ̶"Existence alone, my dear child, this was in the beginning, one only, without a second", declared to be that undifferentiated existence which has absorbed into itself all differentiating peculiarities. It is for this reason that a cause and its effect have no (essential) difference between them. Only thus can this proposition become appropriate (which says) that, by knowing one thing, all things become known. Otherwise, there would further be a complete difference between the thing intended to be illustrated and the example of the lump of clay and of the produced effects thereof, which are (all) given as an illustration in the scriptural passage that begins with-"Just as, my dear child, by one lump of clay, &c."- \[Chhānd. Up.VI.I.4.\]. Therefore, in the scriptural passage which relates to the cause of the world, nothing other than the pradhāna taught by the great sage Kapila is mentioned. Moreover, this passage (now under discussion) contains a proposition and an illustration, and thus it has surely the form of a logical inference. Consequently, what is denoted by the word Existence (or Sat) is nothing other than that (pradhāna) which is capable of being proved by inference (to be the cause of the world).
<br><br>
If it be so held, it is stated (in reply) thus: ̶ "Because the activity imported by the root īksh (to see i. e. to think), is predicated (in relation to what constitutes the cause of the world), that which is not revealed solely by the scripture (viz. the pradhāna) is not (the Sat or the Existence which is referred to in the scriptural passage relating to that cause of the world)." **That which is not revealed solely by the scripture** is that in relation to which the scripture alone does not form the means of proof. It is that which is capable of being established by the process of logical inference. The meaning is that it is the pradhāna. That (pradhānd) is not denoted by the scriptural passages relating to the cause of the world. Why ? **Because the activity imported by the root īksh (to see i. e. to think) is predicated.** That is, because the root īksh is used, in the scriptural passage - "It thought May I become manifold and be born."- \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 2. 3.\], to denote a particular kind of activity in relation to what is imported by the word Existence (or Sat). And it is not possible for the nonintelligent pradhāna to be associated with the activity of
seeing (i. e. of thinking). Therefore, what forms the import of the word Existence (or Sat) is that Highest Person who is capable of so ‘seeing ', and who is a particular intelligent Being that is omniscient and omnipotent. Accordingly, in all contexts which relate to creation, the act of creation is invariably preceded by the act of 'seeing' (i. e. of thinking), as in the following and other scriptural passages :-"He thought-May I create the worlds'. He created these worlds." \[Ait. Up. I. i & 2.\]; "He thought ….. He created the prāṇas." \[Pr. Up. VI. 3 & 4.\].
<br><br>
It may, however, be said here that the cause has necessarily to be in natural conformity with the effect. That is true ; and the Highest Person who is omniscient and omnipotent, who wills the truth, and who owns the intelligent as well as the non-intelligent things in their subtle state as His body, is certainly in natural conformity with all produced effects. For example, the following scriptural passages say the same thing:-"His supreme power is revealed, indeed, as varied, natural, and as consisting of knowledge, strength, and action." \[Svct. Up. VI. 8.\]; "He who understands all and who knows all and whose tapas<sup>345</sup> consists of knowledge"-\[Mund. Up. I.i. 9.\]; "He whose body is the avyakta<sup>346</sup> whose body is the akshara ….. whose body is mrityu, He is the internal Self of all beings." \[Sub. Up. VII.\]. And this will be fully explained under the aphorism-"(The Brahman is) not (the cause of the world), because (He is) different (from this world)" \[Ved. Sūt. II. i. 4.\], and also under other aphorisms. Here, (however), it is maintained that the scriptural passages relating to the creation of the world are not capable of importing the pradhāna. The logical objections in regard to what actually forms the import (of those passages) will be invalidated in that same context (in which this above-mentioned aphorism occurs).
<br><br>
What has been stated to the effect that this passage (viz. Chhānd. Up. VI. i & 2.) is decidedly in the form of a logical inference, on account of its containing a proposition and an illustration, - that is not right; because there is not given in it any basis of logical inference ( i.e. the middle term). When, by means of the passage "(Did you ask for that teaching) by which what is not heard becomes heard" \[Chhānd. Up. VI. i. 3.\], it is desired to teach how by knowing (a certain) one thing all things become known, then, the example (of the clay, &c.,) is indeed made use of merely to show the possibility of such a thing - to him who is of opinion that such a thing is altogether impossible. As a matter of fact, solely for the reason that the activity imported by the root īksh (to see i. e. to think), is declared (in relation to what forms the cause of the world), it is made out that there is not even the remotest mention of any logical inference (here).
<br><br>
It may again be said thus:- It is not that main and natural significance of 'seeing ', which is found to exist in intelligent beings, that is mentioned here ; but, on the other hand, it is a figurative significance of 'seeing' (that is implied here); because, in the following scriptural passages "That fire saw" \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 2. 3.\], “Those waters saw" \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 2.4.\], there is the association of a figurative 'seeing' (with the pradhāna). Moreover, it is common to apply figuratively the attributes of intelligent beings to non-intelligent things, as in the instances, "The paddy crops are expecting the rains", "By means of the rains the (sown) seed became exceedingly gladdened."
<br><br>
Therefore, after stating the supposition that the ‘seeing' (here mentioned) may be figurative, he (the Sutrakara) disproves it (thus).
<br><br>
**Sutra 6. Gauṇaśchenātmashabdāt**
<br><br>
**If it be said that it (viz. the import of the root īksh, to see) is (here) figurative, (it is maintained that) it cannot be so; because there is the word Ātman (or Self mentioned in the context).<sup>347</sup>**
<br><br>
What has been stated (above) to the effect that, since there is the association of a figurative 'seeing'(with the pradhāna), this predication of 'seeing' in relation to Existence (or Sat) also is figurative, and is intended to denote
<br><br>
that condition (of the pradhāna) which invariably precedes creation, this is not right; because, in the following passage (occurring in that context)- "All this has That for its Self; That is Existence; That is the Atman (or the Self)." \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 8. 7.\], - that which is denoted by the word Existence (or Sat) is (also) denoted by the word Ātman (or Self). What is said is this:-That teaching, which is found in the passage “All this has That for its Self. That is the Self." \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 8. 7.\], has in view the world which is made up of intelligent and non-intelligent things, and points out that the Sat (or the Existence) is the Self thereof; and it (viz. such a teaching) cannot be appropriately given in relation to the (purely) nonintelligent thing pradhāna. Thus the elements of fire (tejas), water, and earth have also the Highest Self for their Self. Therefore the words tejas, &c., are also significant of the Highest Self alone. Accordingly there is the following scriptural passage: ̶
<br><br>
"Indeed entering into these three deities along with this individual self which is (also) the same as Myself, I evolve the differentiation of names and forms." \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 3. 2.\]. And from this it follows that tejas and the other elements acquire the character of being things and also the capability of assuming their own particular names wholly as a consequence of the Supreme Self entering into them. Therefore in these statements also, namely,- "That fire saw";-"Those waters saw"-\[Chhānd. Up. VI. 2, 3 & 4.\], the predication of 'seeing' has its primary and natural significance.
<br><br>
Consequently, in the statement -"It saw" ̶ \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 2. 3.\], the supposition, which gives a figurative significance (to 'seeing') even as a consequence of the association (of that 'seeing' with the pradhāna), is altogether dispelled (as wrong). Such is the meaning of this aphorism.
<br><br>
What is denoted by the word Existence (or Sat\] is not the pradhāna, for the following reason also:-
<br><br>
**Sutra 7. Tannishṭhasya mokshopadeśāt.**
<br><br>
**Because (also) it is taught (in the context) that he who is firmly devoted to That (viz. the Sat) obtains final release.**
<br><br>
After the scriptural sentence-"That thou art"- \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 8. 7.\],- teaches Śvetaketu, who is desirous of attaining final release, that the Sat is to be continuously meditated upon as the Ātman (or the Self), this (other) sentence -“ As long as he is not freed (from the body), so long there is delay; then he will be blessed."- \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 14. 2.\]- tells him that in the case of the person, who is firmly devoted to that (Sat or One Existence), final release, the nature of which is the attainment of the Brahman, is delayed only till the falling off of the body. And if the non-intelligent pradhāna had been taught to be the cause of the world, then it would not have been appropriate to teach that the continuous meditation of it as the Self forms the means of attaining final release. And according to the passage -"Of whatever nature a man's worship is in this world, of that nature he becomes after death."-\[Chhānd. Up. III. 14. i.\], - there must result to him, who is firmly devoted to that (pradhāna), nothing other than the attainment of that (same) non-intelligent thing (or the pradhāna). Moreover, the sastra (or the scripture), which is much more affectionate (towards us) than even thousands of mothers and fathers, cannot teach (us) to attain that non-intelligent thing (or pradhāna) which forms the' Cause of (our) being attacked by (our) well-known three miseries.<sup>348</sup> Indeed those who maintain that the pradhāna forms the cause of the world do not acknowledge that final release results to him who is firmly devoted to (that) pradhāna.
<br><br>
Again the pradhāna is not (what is denoted by the word Sal or Existence\] for the following reason also : ̶
<br><br>
**Sutra 8. Heyatvāvachanāchcha**.
<br><br>
**Because also it is not declared (in the context) that it (viz. what is denoted by the word Sat or Existence) deserves to be discarded.**
<br><br>
If the pradhāna alone were that cause (of creation) which is denoted by the word Sat (or Existence), then (the idea of) Śvetaketu, who was desirous of attaining final release, being the same as that (Sat) would be opposed to (his) final release, and should therefore have been taught (to him) to be only such (an idea) as altogether deserved to be discarded. And that is not done. On the contrary, in the following passages, namely, "That thou art,"- \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 8.7.\]; "So long as he is not (freed from the body), &c."- \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 14. 2.\],- it is taught that that (idea of his being the same as the Sat} is necessarily such as deserves to be adopted (by him).
<br><br>
The pradhāna is not (what is denoted by the word Sat or Existence) for the following reason also:-
<br><br>
**Sutra 9. Pratijñāvirodhāt.<sup>349</sup>**
<br><br>
**Because (also) there would then be the contradiction of the proposition<sup>350</sup> (enunciated in the context).**
<br><br>
If the pradhāna were taken to be the cause of the world, there would also be the contradiction of the proposition (enunciated in the context). Indeed, in the very beginning of the scriptural passage (under reference), the proposition is enunciated that, by knowing a (certain) single thing, all things become known. And that (proposition,) has to be justified solely by means of the fact that, from the knowledge of the causal Sat (or Existence), the world, which is its produced effect and is made up of the intelligent and the non-intelligent things, becomes known; and the reason (for this) is that a cause and its effect are not different from each other. But the whole collection of intelligent beings (viz. the individual selves) cannot be the effects produced out of the pradhāna; and consequently, by knowing the pradhāna, the knowledge relating to the whole collection of intelligent beings cannot result; thus this (proposition itself) would be contradicted if the pradhāna be taken to be the cause of the world.
<br><br>
The pradhana is not (what is denoted by the word Sat or Existence in the scriptural passage under discussion) for the following reason also :-
<br><br>
**Sutra 10. Svāpyayāt.**
<br><br>
**Because (also), there is (mentioned in the context), the withdrawal (of the individual self) into its own cause, (i. e. into the Sat).**
<br><br>
This scriptural passage, namely, -"Know from me, my dear child, what deep sleep is. When any person is known to be asleep, he is then in union with the Sat. He withdraws into his own cause. Therefore they say, he sleeps, because he is absorbed into his own cause (i.e. into the Brahman),”-\[Chhānd. Up. VI. 8. i.\] - relates to that very subject which is denoted by the word Sat. It declares that the individual soul, who is asleep and is in union with the Sat, has withdrawn (himself) into his own cause; that is, that he has been absorbed into his own cause. And (the) dissolution (of a thing) is (its) absorption into (its) own cause. Moreover the non-intelligent pradhāna does not deserve to become the cause of the individual soul. The meaning of the scriptural statement -"He withdraws into his own cause," - \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 8. i.\], is that the individual soul goes back only unto the Supreme Self. It is declared in the scriptural passage<sup>351</sup> relating to the differentiation of names and forms that that Brahman Himself, who has the intelligent thing (or the individual soul) for His body and forms its Self, is denoted by the word jīva (which ordinarily means the individual soul). By means of the statement" - He is then in union with the Sat; He withdraws into his own cause." \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 8. i.\] - it is taught that that Brahman who is denoted by the word jīva is free from (any) association with names and forms at the time of deep sleep also, as (He is) at the time of universal dissolution; and (He) is hence to be denoted merely by the word Sat (or Existence). To the same effect it is stated in similar contexts (elsewhere) that, owing to his (i. e. the individual self's) not being associated with names and forms, he is embraced by Him who is omniscient; and consequently it is said that, "When he is embraced by the omniscient Self, he does not know anything that is external nor anything that is internal." \[Bṛih. Up. IV. 3. 21.\]. Indeed, until final release takes place, the individual self is associated with names and forms; and it is, therefore, that there is born (in him) the knowledge of objects other than himself. At the time of deep sleep he certainly gives up names and forms, and is embraced by the Sat (i. e. by the Brahman):- and again, in the wakeful state, he becomes associated with names and forms and assumes (for himself) a particular name and a particular form. This is clearly stated in other scriptural passages, namely, "When he (i. e. the individual self) is asleep, he sees no dreams whatsoever; and he becomes one wholly with that Prāṇa (or Brahman\] ……………………… From that Self, the prānās proceed each towards its (own,) place."-\[Kaush. Up. IV. 19.\]. To the same effect is the following scriptural passage also -"Whatever these beings are here, (i. e. in the state of separation from their cause), whether a tiger, or a lion, or a wolf, or a boar, ……….<sup>352</sup> or a fly, or a mosquito, - that they become again and again." \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 9. 2. & VI. 10. 2.\]. And a similar scriptural text also says that the individual soul who is so in deep sleep "is embraced by the omniscient Self." \[Bṛih. Up. IV. 3. 21.\]. Therefore, He who is denoted by the word Sat (in the scriptural passage under discussion), is that Highest Person alone who is the Highest Brahman, who is omniscient and is the Highest Lord. The Vṛittikāra (Bodhāyana) says the same thing thus:- "In the scriptural text -'Then he is in union with the Sat.' this (viz. the fact that the Sat is the Brahman who is the cause of the world) is conclusively made out by means of (the creatures) withdrawing (into the Sat) and returning (from the Sat); and the scripture also says that 'He (the individual self) is embraced by the omniscient Self.”
<br><br>
The pradhāna is not (what is denoted by the word Sat) for the following reason also:-
<br><br>
**Sutra 11. Gatisāmanyāt.**
<br><br>
**Because there has to be a similarity of import (between the passage under reference and the other passages relating to the cause of the creation, &c., of the world).**
<br><br>
Whatever is the **import** of the following among other passages relating to the creation of the world, namely, - "The Self, indeed, this one only was in the beginning. Nothing else lived.<sup>353</sup> He thought -'May I create the worlds.' He created these worlds."- \[Ait. Up. I. i & 2.\]; "From that same Self, indeed, the spatial ether came into existence, from the spatial ether the air (came into existence); from the air, the fire; from the fire, the waters; and from the waters, the earth." \[Taitt. Up. II. i. i.\]; "That which is this Rigveda is the breath of Him, that is, of this Great Being."- \[Sub. Up. II.\]-<sup>354</sup> (whatever) is (their) signification, from the **similarity (of import)** with that, that is, from the sameness of meaning (which) this (passage under reference) is to have with that (signification) (it has to be inferred that the pradhāna is not the Sat). In all these (above passages) also, the Lord of all is made out to be the cause (of the world). Therefore here (i. e. in this passage) also it is definitely determined that the Lord of all is alone the cause (of the world).
<br><br>
The pradhāna is not (what is denoted by the word Sat) for the following reason als :
<br><br>
**Sutra 12. Śrutvāchcha.**
<br><br>
**Because also it is revealed (in the very Upanishad in which the passage under discussion occurs, and in other Upanishads, that the Supreme Self is the cause of the universe).**
<br><br>
Indeed, in this very Upanishad (viz. the Chhāndogya}, in the following passages, namely,- "Entering in along with this individual self which is (also) the same as Myself, I evolve the differentiation of names and forms."- \[Chhānd, Up. VI. 3. 2.\], " All these things which are born, my dear one, have their origin in the Sat (i. e. in the One Existence), have their abode in the Sat, and are established in the Sat." - \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 8. 4 & 6.\], "All this has this (Brahman} for its Self. That (Brahman) is Existence. He is the Self." \[Chhānd. Up. VI. 8. 7.\], "Whatever there is here as existent and whatever there is as non-existent in relation to him, - all that is contained in Him." -\[Chhānd. Up. VIII. i. 3.\], "In Him, all desires are contained."- \[Chhānd. Up. VIII. i. 5.\], "This Self is devoid of sin, is free from old age, free from death, free from sorrow, free from hunger, free from thirst, and desires the truth, and wills the truth." - \[Chhānd. Up. VIII. i. 5. & VIII. 7. i & 3.\] it is declared that that, which is denoted by the word Sat, is, in consequence of its possessing the same character as the Self, capable of causing the differentiation of names and forms and possesses (the quality of) omniscience, (the quality of) omnipotence, the quality of being the support of all, the quality of being devoid of sin, &c., the quality of desiring the truth, and also the quality of willing the truth. To the same effect are the following and other scriptural passages found elsewhere also:- "He has none as His lord and (none) as His ruler in the world; and He has no characteristic body whatsoever. He is the cause and is the Lord of what is the lord of the senses (i. e. of the jīva or the individual soul); He has no progenitor and no superior."- \[Svet. Up. VI. 9.\]; "The omniscient Lord who creates all beings gives them names, and, calling them (by those names), He ever continues to be." \\Taitt. Ār. III. 12. 7.\]; "He, who has entered within, is the ruler of all things that are born, and is the Self of all." \[Taitt. Ār. III. 24.\]; "He is the Self of the whole universe and is the best refuge; He is the Lord of the world, the Lord of the individual souls ; whatever thing there is in this world, either seen or heard, Narayana pervades all that within and without and so remains for ever". - \[M. Nār. XI. 3 5.\]; "He is the internal Self of all beings, He is devoid of all sins, He is the Divine Lord, He is the one Narayana.' \[Sub. Up. VII. i.\]. Therefore the scriptural passage which mentions the cause of the world is not capable of importing (as such) the pradhāna and other similar things. Consequently it is settled that that Narayana alone who is omniscient and omnipotent, who is the Lord of all lords, who is devoid of even the smallest taint of all that is evil, who is the great ocean that receives the flood of all the collections of (all) the innumerable auspicious qualities which are unsurpassed in excellence, who is the Highest Person, He alone forms the one cause of the universe and is the Brahman that has to be enquired into.
<br><br>
For the same reason it has to be understood that the contention, which maintains that the Brahman is pure intelligence devoid of characterising attributes, has also been set at naught by the Sūtrakāra with the help of these (above quoted) scriptural passages; because it is established (by him) that that Brahman, who is to be enquired into, is associated with the real attribute of 'seeing', &c., which forms the main and natural significance of the root īksh, (to 'see'). Indeed, according to the contention which maintains that that (which is the cause of the world) is devoid of characterising attributes, even the character of a witness (i. e. of one who 'sees') has to be unreal (as applied to that cause). That the Brahman, who is to be made out from the Vedānta, has been enunciated to be the object of the enquiry (here), and that He is intelligent, are (both) declared by means of this aphorism among others; namely, "Because the activity imported by the root īksh (to see i.e. to think\] is predicated (in relation to what constitutes the cause of the world), that which is not revealed solely by the scripture (viz. the pradhāna), is not (the Sat or the Existence which is referred to in the scriptural passage relating to that cause of the world)." \[Ved. Sūt. I. i. 5.\]. To possess the character of an intelligent being is known to be the same as to possess the quality of intelligence. And accordingly that which is devoid of the attribute of 'seeing' (or thinking) has exactly the same nature as the pradhāna.
<br><br>
Moreover, according to the position which maintains that the Brahman is pure luminosity devoid of characterising attributes, it is difficult even to establish that He is (such) luminosity. Luminosity (or intelligence) is indeed known to be that particular thing which is capable of making itself and other things fit to be realised (by the mind). The thing which is devoid of attributes does not possess both these characteristics, and it certainly has in consequence the character of a non-intelligent thing like a pot or any other similar object. If it be said that, even though it does not possess both these characteristics, it is as good as if it had them, it is replied that it cannot be so. To be as good as if it had them is indeed nothing other than (for it) to be able to do what they are capable of doing. On admitting the possession (by the Brahman) of the quality corresponding to this capability, the position which maintains the attributelessness (of the Brahman) will indeed amount to have been given up. Again, if it be urged that, on the authority of the scripture, this one particular characteristic quality (of capability) has to be admitted, then indeed, for that same reason, omniscience, omnipotence, the quality of being the Lord of all lords, the quality of being the abode of all auspicious attributes, the quality of being hostile to all that is evil, and all other similar qualities will have to be admitted. Again, to possess a capability is the same as to be able to produce a particular effect; and that (possession of the capability) has to be definitely determined solely by means of (its) produced effect. When (such) a particular produced effect is incapable of being proved, then the possession of that capability, which has to be definitely determined solely by means of that (effect), becomes also incapable of proof.
<br><br>
Further, according to him who maintains (the Brahman to be) an attributeless entity, it is impossible to prove (that the Brahman possesses) the character of being a thing at all; for, it has been already<sup>355</sup> pointed out that perception, inference, revelation, and one's own experience deal with things which are possessed of attributes.
<br><br>
Therefore, it is conclusively established that that Highest Person alone, who is capable of 'seeing' and of willing to the effect<sup>356 -</sup> ‘May I become manifold in the form of the world which is made up of wonderful intelligent and non-intelligent things', - that (Highest Person alone) is He who has to be enquired into.
<br><br>
341\. The Pradhāna of the Sānkhyas is what is otherwise known as the Prakriti, It is Nature, or the self- evolving material substratum of the universe.

342\. The passages forming the basis of this Adhikarana are contained in Chhdnd. Up. VI.

343\. The Sānkhya is the pūrvapakshin or the objector here.

344\. According to the Sahkhyas, the evolutionary processes of creation are possible only when there is heterogeneity in the constitution of the Prakriti. This heterogeneity is the result of the differentiation of the Prakriti into the three Gunas of Sattva , Rajas, and Tamas. When this differentiation ceases, or when there is homogeneity in the constitution of the Prakriti, there can be no creation and no evolution. Sattva represents the condition of completed development and perfect equilibrium. Rajas represents the condition of act ive up-building heterogeneity, the want of equilibrium in which is the cause of the progress of evolution, And Tamas represents that other condition which causes the evolved uni-verse to tend towards dissolution, These three terms aie also used with a psychological significance, which is partly figurative but is more largely due to the belief that the material of the body of the incarnating soul determines largely the nature of the mental and moral qualities possessed by it in the embodied condition, and that this material itself is so chosen as to suit the Karma of the incarnating soul.

345\. The word tapas ordinarily denotes penance and religious austerities. It is frequently said in Vedic and Vedāntic literature that before creation the Creator performed tapas. Surely this tapas cannot mean penance or austerities, and it is generally interpreted to mean His inner mental effort of thinking and willing which has been at the root of all creation,

346, Vide supra un. 184 & 185.

347\. The Upanishadic context relating to this section is the whole of the sixth Prapāṭhaka of the Chhandogya-Upanishad.

348, Vide supra p. 4. n. 12.

349\. This Sutra is not commented tipon by Sankara and by Anandattrtha in their commentaries on the Vedanta- Sutras.

350\. This proposition is contain ed in Chhand. Up. VI. i. 3. And is to the effect- "Did you ask for that teaching by which what is not heard becomes heard, what is not thought becomes thought, what is not known becomes known,”

351\. Vide (J.hdnd. U/>. VI 3. 2.

352, The quotation here is not complete the portion omitted being "or an insect or a moth."

353\. Literally, winked or opened Us eyes.

354\. Vide supra n. 251.

355\. Vide supra pp. 54 to 60.

356\. Vide Taitt. Up. II. 6. I. & Chhana Up. VI .2. 3.
